# What is truth

This is a pretty hairy question, but we have to start here. We can't get
_anywhere_ in a discussion about truth if we can't agree on what truth is.

There is a great temptation to define truth as being outside ourselves, or
bigger than ourselves. It is what's "out there" or what "really is" or what we
can plainly see or touch or perceive. But in fact we have no special access to
truth, at least not that I know of (unless we _do_, which is something I'll get
to in the next chapter).

Maybe this is the place to start: how do you know that something is true? If we
can answer that, perhaps we can begin to work out a definition of what truth
is.

Do I know something is true if I can see it? That can't be good enough. We know
about hallucinations, illusions. Some people see things that aren't there.

What about if _everyone_ (or _lots_ of people) can see it? Intuitively, that
feels better. But mass hallucinations are also possible, as is a mass illusion.
(Think about _The Matrix_.)

Can I just _tell_ if something is true, i.e. if it _has_ to be? What if it's
inconceivable that it could not be; for example, that 1 + 1 = 2, or that "I
think, therefore I am"? Here there is a challenge. It depends on the limits of
reason, which I will discuss in chapter 3. We have to decide whether we will
view our ability to discern as _axiomatic_, unquestionable. To me, this feels
like too much of a leap. But I also admit that it may be the only thing we've
got.

I will say more about axioms in the next chapter, but for now I will propose a
working definition for truth. Truth is **the set of valid claims within a
belief system**.

A **belief system** is a set of criteria for determining whether something is
true or not. Within a system, if an idea fulfills all criteria, then it is
true in that system. For example, arithmetic is a belief system. The rules of
arithmetic allow us to say that 1 + 1 = 2 is true, and 1 + 1 = 3 is false.

A belief system need not aspire to be universal or all-encompassing. The
statement "The sky is blue" has no truth value in arithmetic; it is a statement
on which arithmetic has nothing to say. This gets at a key point: there is a
distinction between "false" and "not true": if an idea can be stated according
to the rules of a belief system but fails that system's criteria, then it's
false. If it cannot be stated according to the rules of the system, then it
can't be said to be true or false within that system. In other words it is not
true, but it is also not false.

Consider science as a belief system. Scientific truths require empirical
observation. The idea that there exist supernatural beings, who are not
empirically observable, and whose actions are not empirically observable, is
not true according to science; but it is also not false. Science has nothing
to say one way or the other. Similarly, the idea that we are all part of a
computer simulation, which we can never escape or directly observe, is neither
true nor false from a purely scientific standpoint.

Am I saying that truth is relative? Yes. It is always relative to some belief
system. A belief system provides the criteria for saying whether something is
true or not. Without those criteria, there is no truth.

How do we know which belief system is "right"? We don't. That's next.
