# The basis for belief

A friend of mine said to me that the way to find truth is to take nothing for
granted. I asked him how he knew this. He admitted that he _didn't_ know it
for sure, but he strongly suspected it.

I propose that you can't _really_ take nothing for granted. Any system of
belief requires some fundamental postulate, an axiom: a thing that we take for
granted and never question. An example might be: *Take nothing for granted,
except for the rule that you should take nothing for granted.*

A religious person might take for granted that an all-powerful (omnipotent),
all-knowing (omniscient), and all-loving (omnibenevolent) creator made the
universe that we inhabit, and further that this being created each one of us
with a purpose. To this person, any pursuit of truth is ultimately measured
against whether it brings the pursuer closer to this creator, the one we call
God, or pulls them farther away.

A secular person might take a very different notion for granted, that the world
we live in follows consistent rules. If we observe phenomena that appear to
contradict the consistent rules that we believe we have established, we assume
that these observations were somehow erroneous. To this person, any pursuit of
truth is validated by whether it leads to results that are repeatable.

I have heard people say that the scientific approach to finding truth has been
validated throughout history: just look at all of the advancements we've made
in technology, medicine, agriculture, etc. But this is circular reasoning. The
axiom of this belief system is that repeatability = truth. The way to know that
something is _true_ in this system is to be able to repeat it. But how do we
know that being able to repeat something means it's true?

Now, I said an axiom is something you never question; but really, you _can_
question it. You can even choose to toss out one of your axioms and "jump" to
a new belief system. But you will be doing so arbitrarily. There can be no
basis for it that is rooted in the belief system you had before.

In the previous chapter I said that we have no special access to truth...
unless we do. This could indeed be something you take for granted: that you
have an innate ability to identify truth. For me, this doesn't smell right. I
will elaborate in the next chapter. But I also recognize that it might smell
right to someone else.

If you take for granted that you can identify the truth innately, then that is
an axiom of your belief system. What this means is you can actually _define_
truth in your belief system as anything that seems true to you.
Congratulations! This represents, as far as I can tell, the most expedient
definition of truth available.

Of course I am being a bit cheeky. Generally speaking, no one belief system is
comprehensive enough that we can have just one.
